I have here a really remarkable fragment of
the history of religion in China in the 20th
century.
This is a book I probably wouldn't believe
exists if I hadn't seen it with my own eyes.
This is the Apotheosis of general Douglas
MacArthur.
Although that may seem ridiculous at first,
the book itself explains that while Douglas
MacArthur was not a member of the Daoist religion
during his life, after he died he transformed
into a disembodied state, and in that state
he became a student of Daoism, he learned
Chinese as a language, and, um, eventually,
achieved immortality; he became a god with
a lower-case g, and, uh… delivered a set
of revelations to the public here on earth
in Chinese (his sermon is, in fact, in Chinese
poetry), on the night of November 12th, 1979.
So among the many things that MacArthur says
from beyond the grave here, he says, "A third
world war is unavoidable."
"Compared with the first two world wars, it
will be the most devastating."
"Nobody is capable of predicting the drastic
changes that will take place in the world's
situation."
"World-wide, there will be endless wars.
From these wars, fate will only allow 3 out
of every 10 human beings to escape disaster."
So, in, uh, versified semi-classical Chinese,
we there have, uh, a set of reflections that
you can definitely find in many science-fiction
movies, many secular sources from the same
period of time.
It could not have been written ten years earlier
in history, and it could not have been written
ten years later.
You know, I think it is a little bit appealing
or maybe thrilling for modern Europeans to
get a hold of this type of material (this
is maybe a remarkable example), and see that
in places like India and China the world of
the gods-with-a-lower-case-g continued, that
it continued to be possible for someone who
was a military leader to be elevated to becoming
a god; that, as in pre-Christian, Greco-Roman
antiquity, you had more of a dotted line between
the divine and the secular, between the political
and the religious, and more of a dynamic tension
and interplay between the two.
We talk about the history of the western world
with a very clear, dark line separating the
era of polytheism (gods with a lower-case
g) from the era of monotheism, having one
god, with one hierarchy, very definitely written
with a capital letter g.
From the East Asian perspective, there is
no convenient dividing line that way, between
one form of religion that has everything superstitious
and negative assigned to it, and another category
of religion that's presumed to be philosophical,
liberal, progressive, and a positive part
of a democratic and pluralistic society.
But that really is the core of the modern,
western bias about Greco-Roman religion, [the
assumption] is exactly that it's pluralistic
and somehow linked to democracy (in ways that
we don't like to think about too clearly).
The Asian attitude towards the history of
religion, while it remains open to the possibility
of a military figure being elevated into becoming
a god, while it remains open to this kind
of porous interplay between political reality,
visionary religious experience, new religious
movements, and so on, while in that sense
it remains open, there's also a much more
totalistic hostility between one category
in which all superstition exists, and one
category in which all opposition to superstition
exists.
And, to some extent, I think you can see that
plays out even in how tremendously violent
Chinese communism was toward religion (also
Cambodian communism, trying to imitate Chinese
communism), which was indeed more totalistic
and more violent than Soviet communism, although
Soviet communism had its tremendous massacres.
As with so many religious documents from so
many different eras of history, we have this
remarkable tension between the claims to supernatural
knowledge, being utterly transcendental, often
immortal, unchanging, and the all-too-human
political reality that's (of course) fleeting.
It wouldn't have been written the same way
ten years later or ten years earlier.
It really reflects the context both of the
preacher and of the crowd being preached to,
in this case in 1979.